Feat: Edit metadata resources (#1188)
CommunitySolidServer/CommunitySolidServer: documentation/metadata-editing.md

The CSS will throw an error (409 `ConflictHttpError`) when trying to change this protected metadata.

## Impact on creating containers

When creating a container the input body is ignored
and performing a `PUT` request on an existing container will result in an error.
Container metadata can only be added and modified by performing a `PATCH` on the description resource,
similarly to documents.
This is done to clearly differentiate between a containers representation and metadata.

## Example of a workflow for editing a description resource {#workflow}

In this example, we add an inbox description to `http://localhost:3000/foo/`.
This allows discovery of the `ldp:inbox` as described in the [Linked Data Notifications specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/ldn/).

We have started the CSS with the default configuration
and have already created an inbox at `http://localhost:3000/inbox/`.

We don't know the location of the description resource
So first, we send a `HEAD` request to the resource to retrieve the description resource URL.

```shell
curl --head 'http://localhost:3000/foo/'
```

> which will at least the following response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which will produce a response with at least these headers:
```

This was achieved by executing a `PUT` request to the container and adding the metadata triples in the body of that request.

This was not in line with the [Solid Protocol](https://solidproject.org/TR/2021/protocol-20211217#writing-resources)
about writing resources.
The protocol states the following:

> Servers MUST NOT allow HTTP POST, PUT and PATCH to update a container’s resource metadata statements;
> if the server receives such a request, it MUST respond with a 409 status code.

Therefore, since it is now possible to edit description resources directly,
the above functionality has been removed from the CSS.
This means that now when creating a container, the contents of the body are ignored.
Additionally, it is now forbidden to perform a `PUT` request to an existing container.

## Example of a workflow for editing a description resource {#workflow}

In this example, we are trying to add an inbox description to an `ldp:Resource`.
This inbox indication will then allow discovery for the `ldp:inbox` as described in the [Linked Data Notifications specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/ldn/).

> To give some context, assume we have started the CSS with the default configuration
> and have created an inbox which has as URL `http://localhost:3000/inbox/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have started the CSS with the default configuration
and have already created an inbox at `http://localhost:3000/inbox/`.
```

We don't know the location of the description resource
So first, we send a `HEAD` request to the resource to retrieve the description resource URL.

```shell

> curl --location --head 'http://localhost:3000/'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
curl --location --head 'http://localhost:3000/foo/'
```

```

which will at least the following response

```shell
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

> Link: <http://localhost:3000/.meta>; rel="describedby"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Link: <http://localhost:3000/foo/.meta>; rel="describedby"
```
Etc. below.

```
Now that we have the URL of the description resource,
we create a query for adding the inbox in the description of the resource.
This can be either with a SPARQL Update

```shell
curl --location --request PATCH 'http://localhost:3000/.meta' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/sparql-update' \

> --data-raw 'INSERT DATA { <http://localhost:3000/> <http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#inbox> <http://localhost:3000/inbox/>. }'

Reviewer 2: Would simply not have the SPARQL example in this document, only the N3 one (as long as that is the only one in the spec)

```

or with an N3 Patch.

```shell

> curl --location --request PATCH 'http://localhost:3000/resource.meta' \
> --header 'Content-Type: text/n3' \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
curl -X PATCH 'http://localhost:3000/resource.meta' \
-H 'Content-Type: text/n3' \
```
And similarly in the other requests. `--location` is not needed.

--data-raw '@prefix solid: <http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#>.
<> a solid:InsertDeletePatch;
solid:inserts { <http://localhost:3000/> <http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#inbox> <http://localhost:3000/inbox/>. }.'
```

After this update, we can verify that the inbox is added by performing a GET request to the description resource

```shell
curl --location --request GET 'http://localhost:3000/.meta'
```

> With as result for the body

Reviewer 2: It should also be in the response header right?

Author: Not when performing the GET to the description resource.
When you do a GET request to the subject resource, it is in the response header (due the configuration in the metadata-writer).

Reviewer 2: Ah true, perhaps mention that as well then.

> # Editing metadata of resources

Reviewer 2: General comments about the document:

* Talk about description resources instead of metadata resources, as the first is the term that is used in the spec. Specifically, we use the description resource to represent all the metadata we have on a resource.
* There should be a part somewhere explaining that we ignore container bodies when doing a PUT as that is something people might expect. And that we don't allow a PUT on an existing container, with some explanation why.
* It might be interesting to show the example output when doing a GET on the description resource of a standard description resource, and then perhaps a small N3 Patch (not SPARQL update) example that specifically adds an inbox to a resource, instead of the generic PATCH example that there is now, as that is probably something that would be useful for some people.
* Although I do say that we shouldn't list everything that isn't allowed, we should probably mention that DELETE does not work on metadata. Should in fact see this documentation partially as a "spec" document describing how description resources work for CSS, similar to how the protocol spec defines how the interactions with standard resources work.
* Any other exception mentioned in https://github.com/CommunitySolidServer/CommunitySolidServer/issues/1027, but unless I missed one, I think this covers everything.

> ## What is a metadata resource

Reviewer 2: There should be a link to https://solidproject.org/TR/2021/protocol-20211217#auxiliary-resources-description-resource somewhere.

> Metadata resources contain auxiliary information about a resource. This indicates that a resource will always have a corresponding metadata resource and therefore metadata resources can not be created or deleted directly.

Reviewer 2: Make the lines shorter so there is no word wrap in the editor, similar to how the other documentation files are written.

Metadata resources are discoverable through interacting with its corresponding resource.
More concrete, when performing a `GET` or `HEAD` request on a resource, there will be a `describedby` response **Link Header** with an URL that points to the metadata resource.

**Note**: with the default configuration, a metadata resource that corresponds to a resource with URL `http://example.org/resource` will have `http://example.org/resource.meta` as URL. 
However, this does not have to be always the case as the Solid Protocol does not state anything about the strategy of encoding the metadata resource. Therefore, the CSS makes this configurable in the [metadata configuration file](../config/util/auxiliary/strategies/meta.json).

## How to edit the metadata of a resource

Editing the metadata of a resource is performed by editing the auxiliary metadata resource directly. This can only be done using `PATCH` requests (see [example workflow](#workflow)).

> Thus it is forbidden to perform a `PUT` request on metadata. The reason of this approach is that some metadata is [protected by the server](https://solidproject.org/TR/protocol#resource-containment) and other metadata is generated by the server. A `PUT` request, according to the HTTP specification, replaces the state of the target resource entirely by the request payload. This is not possible with metadata resources and therefore not allowed.

Reviewer 2: Would not explicitly say that this is because of the HTTP spec as that invites discussion about semantic details.

Spec links should also include the specific version of the spec that is being referenced, see the link in my comment above.

> ### Protected metadata

Reviewer 2: This is a repeat of above so should be merged.

There is some metadata that is forbidden to be modified. The CSS will throw an error when trying to change this protected metadata.

Therefore any change PATCH request with a query that will result into modifying the **storage indication** or the **containment triples** will result into a 409 `ConflictHttpError`.

> #### Storage indication

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't really list everything that the user is not allowed to do. Just keep it to how they can do what they want.

```

#### Containment triples

A container can contain several resources, indicated with the predicate `ldp:contains`. Any attempt of adding or removing a resource via editing metadata will fail.

Thus following example query will fail:

```shell
curl --location --request PATCH 'http://localhost:3000/.meta' \
--header 'Content-Type: text/n3' \
--data-raw '@prefix solid: <http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#>.
<> a solid:InsertDeletePatch;
solid:inserts { <http://localhost:3000/> <http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains> <http://localhost:3000/resource> }.'
```

## Example of a workflow for editing a metadata resource {#workflow}

To give some context, assume we have started the CSS with the default configuration and have created a resource which has as URL `http://localhost:3000/resource`.

We don't know the location of the metadata resource, so first we send a `HEAD` request to the resource to retrieve the metadata resource URL.

```shell
curl --location --head 'http://localhost:3000/resource'
```

which will at least the following response

```shell
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Link: <http://localhost:3000/resource.meta>; rel="describedby"
```

> Now that we have the URL of the metadata resource, we create a query of what we want to change in the metadata of the resource (e.g. inserting `<s> <p> <o>.` ). This can be either with a SPARQL Update

Reviewer 2: You can just put a link to `example-requests.md` for people that want to know how to do a patch request. No need to explain again here how a patch works.
